Rearrange Using promises guide (#22163)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/javascript/guide/using_promises/index.md

A {{jsxref("Promise")}} is an object representing the eventual completion or failure of an asynchronous operation. Since most people are consumers of already-created promises, this guide will explain consumption of returned promises before explaining how to create them.

> Essentially, a promise is a returned object to which you attach callbacks, instead of passing callbacks into a function. Imagine a function, `createAudioFileAsync()`, which asynchronously generates a sound file given a configuration record and two callback functions, one called if the audio file is successfully created, and the other called if an error occurs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Essentially, a promise is a returned object to which you attach callbacks, instead of passing callbacks into a function. Imagine a function, `createAudioFileAsync()`, which asynchronously generates a sound file given a configuration record and two callback functions: one called if the audio file is successfully created, and the other called if an error occurs.
```

}, failureCallback);
```

With promises, we accomplish this by creating a promise chain. The API design of promises makes this great, because callbacks are attached to the returned promise object, instead of being passed into a function.

Here's the magic: the `then()` function returns a **new promise**, different from the original:

```js
const promise = doSomething();
const promise2 = promise.then(successCallback, failureCallback);
```

> This second promise (`promise2`) represents the completion not just of `doSomething()`, but also of the `successCallback` or `failureCallback` you passed in, which can be other asynchronous functions returning a promise. When that's the case, any callbacks added to `promise2` get queued behind the promise returned by either `successCallback` or `failureCallback`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This second promise (`promise2`) represents the completion not just of `doSomething()`, but also of the `successCallback` or `failureCallback` you passed in — which can be other asynchronous functions returning a promise. When that's the case, any callbacks added to `promise2` get queued behind the promise returned by either `successCallback` or `failureCallback`.
```

> With this pattern, you can create longer chains of processing, where each promise represents the completion of one asynchronous step in the chain. In addition, the arguments to `then` are optional, and `catch(failureCallback)` is short for `then(null, failureCallback)`, so if your error handling code is the same for all steps, you can attach it to the end of the chain:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this pattern, you can create longer chains of processing, where each promise represents the completion of one asynchronous step in the chain. In addition, the arguments to `then` are optional, and `catch(failureCallback)` is short for `then(null, failureCallback)` — so if your error handling code is the same for all steps, you can attach it to the end of the chain:
```

  });
```

### Nesting

In the two examples above, the first one has one promise chain nested in the return value of another `then()` handler, while the second one uses an entirely flat chain. Simple promise chains are best kept flat without nesting, as nesting can be a result of careless composition. See [common mistakes](#common_mistakes).

Nesting is a control structure to limit the scope of `catch` statements. Specifically, a nested `catch` only catches failures in its scope and below, not errors higher up in the chain outside the nested scope. When used correctly, this gives greater precision in error recovery:

```js
doSomethingCritical()
  .then((result) =>
    doSomethingOptional(result)
      .then((optionalResult) => doSomethingExtraNice(optionalResult))
      .catch((e) => {}),
  ) // Ignore if optional stuff fails; proceed.
  .then(() => moreCriticalStuff())
  .catch((e) => console.error(`Critical failure: ${e.message}`));
```

> Note that the optional steps here are nested, not from the indentation, but from the placement of the outer `(` and `)` around them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the optional steps here are nested — with the nesting caused not by the indentation, but by the placement of the outer `(` and `)` parentheses around the steps.
```

> **Note:** The text "Do this" is not displayed because the "Something failed" error caused a rejection.

### Common mistakes

Here are some common mistakes to watch out for when composing promise chains. Several of these mistakes manifest in the following example:

```js example-bad
// Bad example! Spot 3 mistakes!

doSomething()
  .then(function (result) {
    // Forgot to return promise from inner chain + unnecessary nesting
    doSomethingElse(result).then((newResult) => doThirdThing(newResult));
  })
  .then(() => doFourthThing());
// Forgot to terminate chain with a catch!
```

> The first mistake is to not chain things together properly. This happens when we create a new promise but forget to return it. As a consequence, the chain is broken, or rather, we have two independent chains racing. This means `doFourthThing()` won't wait for `doSomethingElse()` or `doThirdThing()` to finish, and will run in parallel with them, likely unintended. Separate chains also have separate error handling, leading to uncaught errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first mistake is to not chain things together properly. This happens when we create a new promise but forget to return it. As a consequence, the chain is broken — or rather, we have two independent chains racing. This means `doFourthThing()` won't wait for `doSomethingElse()` or `doThirdThing()` to finish, and will run in parallel with them — which is likely unintended. Separate chains also have separate error handling, leading to uncaught errors.
```

The second mistake is to nest unnecessarily, enabling the first mistake. Nesting also limits the scope of inner error handlers, which—if unintended—can lead to uncaught errors. A variant of this is the [promise constructor anti-pattern](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/23803743/what-is-the-explicit-promise-construction-antipattern-and-how-do-i-avoid-it), which combines nesting with redundant use of the promise constructor to wrap code that already uses promises.

The third mistake is forgetting to terminate chains with `catch`. Unterminated promise chains lead to uncaught promise rejections in most browsers. See [error handling](#error_handling) below.

> A good rule-of-thumb is to always either return or terminate promise chains, and as soon as you get a new promise, return it immediately, to flatten things:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A good rule of thumb is to always either return or terminate promise chains, and as soon as you get a new promise, return it immediately, to flatten things:
```

}
```

> It builds on promises — for example, `doSomething()` is the same function as before, so there's minimal refactoring needed to change from promises to `async`/`await`. You can read more about the `async`/`await` syntax in the [async functions](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/async_function) and [`await`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/await) reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It builds on promises — for example, `doSomething()` is the same function as before, so there's minimal refactoring needed to change from promises to `async`/`await`. You can read more about the `async`/`await` syntax in the [async functions](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/async_function) and [`await`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/await) references.
```

Promises solve a fundamental flaw with the callback pyramid of doom, by catching all errors, even thrown exceptions and programming errors. This is essential for functional composition of asynchronous operations.

### Promise rejection events

> If a promise rejection event is not handled by any handler, it bubbles to the top of the call stack, and the host needs to surface it. On the web, whenever a promise is rejected, one of two events is sent to the global scope (generally, this is either the [`window`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window) or, if being used in a web worker, it's the [`Worker`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Worker) or other worker-based interface). The two events are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a promise-rejection event is not handled by any handler, it bubbles to the top of the call stack, and the host needs to surface it. On the web, whenever a promise is rejected, one of two events is sent to the global scope (generally, this is either the [`window`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window) or, if being used in a web worker, it's the [`Worker`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Worker) or other worker-based interface). The two events are:
```

Author: "Promise rejection event" reads better; compound nouns usually aren't hyphenated.

});
```

For Node.js, to prevent the error from being logged to the console (the default action that would otherwise occur), adding that `process.on()` listener is all that's necessary; there's no need for an equivalent of the browser runtime's [`preventDefault()`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Event/preventDefault) method.

However, if you add that `process.on` listener but don't also have code within it to handle rejected promises, they will just be dropped on the floor and silently ignored. So ideally, you should add code within that listener to examine each rejected promise and make sure it was not caused by an actual code bug.

## Composition

There are four [composition tools](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise#promise_concurrency) for running asynchronous operations concurrently: {{jsxref("Promise.all()")}}, {{jsxref("Promise.allSettled()")}}, {{jsxref("Promise.any()")}}, and {{jsxref("Promise.race()")}}.

We can start operations in parallel and wait for them all to finish like this:

```js
Promise.all([func1(), func2(), func3()]).then(([result1, result2, result3]) => {
  // use result1, result2 and result3
});
```

> If one of the promises in the array rejects, `Promise.all()` immediately rejects the returned promise and abort the other operations. This may cause unexpected state or behavior. {{jsxref("Promise.allSettled()")}} is another composition tool that ensures all operations are complete before resolving.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If one of the promises in the array rejects, `Promise.all()` immediately rejects the returned promise and aborts the other operations. This may cause unexpected state or behavior. {{jsxref("Promise.allSettled()")}} is another composition tool that ensures all operations are complete before resolving.
```

/* use last result (i.e. result3) */
```

> However, before you compose promises sequentially, consider if it's really necessary — it's always better to run promises in parallel so that they don't unnecessarily block each other if one's execution doesn't depend on another's result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, before you compose promises sequentially, consider if it's really necessary — it's always better to run promises in parallel so that they don't unnecessarily block each other if one promise's execution doesn't depend on another's result.
```

Author: ```suggestion
However, before you compose promises sequentially, consider if it's really necessary — it's always better to run promises in parallel so that they don't unnecessarily block each other unless one promise's execution depends on another's result.
```

```js
setTimeout(() => saySomething("10 seconds passed"), 10 * 1000);
```

Mixing old-style callbacks and promises is problematic. If `saySomething()` fails or contains a programming error, nothing catches it. This is intrinsic to the design of `setTimeout`.

Luckily we can wrap `setTimeout` in a promise. The best practice is to wrap the callback-accepting functions at the lowest possible level, and then never call them directly again:

```js
const wait = (ms) => new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, ms));

wait(10 * 1000)
  .then(() => saySomething("10 seconds"))
  .catch(failureCallback);
```

The promise constructor takes an executor function that lets us resolve or reject a promise manually. Since `setTimeout()` doesn't really fail, we left out reject in this case. For more information on how the executor function works, see the [`Promise()`](/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/Promise) reference.

## Timing

> Lastly, we will look into the more technical details, about when the registered callbacks get called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, we will look into the more-technical details, about when the registered callbacks get called.
```

Author: I think "more technical" is grammatically more correct?

### Guarantees

In the callback-based API, when and how the callback gets called depends on the API implementor. For example, the callback may be called synchronously or asynchronously:

```js
function doSomething(callback) {
  if (Math.random() > 0.5) {
    callback();
  } else {
    setTimeout(() => callback(), 1000);
  }
}
```

This leads to [the state of Zalgo](https://blog.izs.me/2013/08/designing-apis-for-asynchrony/), because it makes side effects hard to analyze:

```js
let value = 1;
doSomething(() => {
  value = 2;
});
console.log(value); // 1 or 2?
```

> On the other hand, promises are a form of [inversion of control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inversion_of_control) — the API implementor does not control when the callback gets called. Instead, the job of maintaining the callback queue and deciding when to call them is delegated to the promise implementation, and both the API user and API developer automatically gets strong semantic guarantees, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, promises are a form of [inversion of control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inversion_of_control) — the API implementor does not control when the callback gets called. Instead, the job of maintaining the callback queue and deciding when to call the callbacks is delegated to the promise implementation, and both the API user and API developer automatically gets strong semantic guarantees, including:
```
